---
layout: post
title: >-
  Usability Evaluation of a Research Repository and Collaboration Website for
  Human-Animal Bond Researchers
folder: projects
type: project
image: images/HABRICentral-Home.png
excerpt: >-
  This project was an empirical usability evaluation of HABRI (Human-Animal Bond
  Research Initiative) Central webiste, an open access research repository and
  collaboration platform for human-animal bond researchers. HABRI Central hosts
  previously published materials from related disciplines and an extensive
  bibliography, in addition to traditional hub materials such as tools and
  datasets. Results of the evaluation showed that the overall user experience of
  HABRI Central was satisfactory, but also indicated a number of usability
  issues.
published: true
---


**Method**: Questionnaire Survey, Usability Testing   
**Tools**: Silverback, Morae, SAS 


## Background  
The HABRI Central website serves as an open access research repository for human-animal bond research materials (literature, datasets, videos, etc.) from all relevant disciplines. HABRI Central is built on the HUBzero platform developed at Purdue University for collaborative scientific research.

## Method
I recruited seven participants (5 female and 2 male) for the usability evaluation. Participants were researchers in the human-animal bond area. Participants performed the following tasks in the usability evaluation: 

1. find an article in the repository;    
2. submit an article to the repository;  
3. add a citation to an article to the HABRI bibliography;  
4. ask a question in the Questions and Answers area; 
5. join a group and post a message in that group’s discussion area.   

Response measures of the usability evaluation included:
  
1. successfulness of each task;  
2. whether participants needed help from the researcher during each task;  
3. number of steps of the navigational path participants went through in each task;  
4. time to complete each task;  
5. participants’ comments during each task;  
6. participants’ usability ratings of HABRI Central, measured by the System Usability Scale (SUS).  

I also took notes about participants’ behavior during the tasks, such as pauses in mouse movement, facial expression, and body language.

## Results
The results revealed that the separation of resources and bibliography due to adaptation of the HUBzero platform caused some confusion among participants, and certain steps of the resource submission process (e.g., selecting resource type and adding authors) could be improved to provide clear guidance and facilitate user input. The usability evaluation also showed that the HABRI Central interface should conform to common web layout guidelines so that users can relate past experiences to using features on HABRI Central.

## Project Presentation
<iframe src="//www.slideshare.net/slideshow/embed_code/key/4IqdHynGYZjsO3" width="595" height="485" frameborder="0" marginwidth="0" marginheight="0" scrolling="no" style="border:1px solid #CCC; border-width:1px; margin-bottom:5px; max-width: 100%;" allowfullscreen> </iframe> <div style="margin-bottom:5px"> <strong> <a href="//www.slideshare.net/jimmie/usability-evaluation-of-a-research-repository-and-collaboration-website-for-humananimal-bond-researchers" title="Usability Evaluation of a Research Repository and Collaboration Website For Human-animal Bond Researchers" target="_blank">Usability Evaluation of a Research Repository and Collaboration Website For Human-animal Bond Researchers</a> </strong> from <strong><a href="//www.slideshare.net/jimmie" target="_blank">Tao Zhang</a></strong> </div>

The list of usability issues from the test is below.
<object data="http://jimmieego.github.io/projects/assets/HABRICentralUsabilityIssues.pdf" type="application/pdf" width="100%" height="600px">
</object>

Download the [report](/assets/HABRICentralUsabilityIssues.pdf). 

## Related publications  
Zhang, T., Deborah, J. M., & Christopher C. C. (2012). [Usability evaluation of a research repository and collaboration website for human-animal bond researchers](https://hubzero.org/resources/824). Presentation at the *Third HUBzero Conference* (HUBbub 2012).

Zhang, T., Maron, D. J., & Charles, C. C. (2013). [Usability evaluation of a research repository and collaboration website](http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/19322909.2013.739041#.VaG6QxNViko). *Journal of Web Librarianship*, 7(1), 58-82.